The preparation of soil is the first step before growing a crop. One 
of the most important tasks in agriculture is to turn the soil and 
loosen it. This allows the roots to penetrate deep into the soil. 
The loose soil allows the roots to breathe easily even when they go 
deep into the soil. Why does the loosening of soil allow the roots 
to breathe easily? The loosened soil helps in the growth of 
earthworms and microbes present in the soil. These organisms are 
friends of the farmer since they further turn and loosen the soil 
and add humus to it. But why does the soil need to be turned and 
loosened? You have learnt in the previous classes that soil contains 
minerals, water, air and some living organisms. In addition, dead 
plants and animals get decomposed by soil organisms. In this way, 
various nutrients held in the dead organisms are released back into 
the soil. These nutrients are again absorbed by plants. Since only a 
few centimetres of the top layer of soil supports plant growth, 
turning and loosening of soil brings the nutrient-rich soil to the 
top so that plants can use these nutrients. Thus,turning and 
loosening of soil is very important for cultivation of crops. The 
process of loosening and turning of the soil is called tilling or 
ploughing. This is done by using a plough. Ploughs are made of wood 
or iron. If the soil is very dry, it may need watering before 
ploughing. The ploughed field may have big pieces of soil called 
crumbs. It is necessary to break these crumbs with a plank. The 
field is levelled for sowing as well as for irrigation purposes. The 
levelling of soil is done with the help of a leveller. Sometimes, 
manure is added to the soil before tilling. This helps in proper 
mixing of manure with soil. The soil is watered before sowing.Before 
sowing the seeds, it is necessary to break soil to the size of 
grains to get better yield. This is done with the help of various 
tools. The main tools used for this purpose are the plough, hoe and 
cultivator.Plough : This is being used since ancient times for 
tilling the soil, adding fertilisers to the crop, removing the 
weeds, scraping of soil, etc. This implement is made of wood and is 
drawn by a pair of bulls or other animals (horses, camels, etc.). It 
contains a strong triangular iron strip called ploughshare. The main 
part of the plough is a long log of wood which is called a 
ploughshaft. There is a handle at one end of the shaft. The other 
end is attached to a beam which is placed on the bullsâ€™ necks. One 
pair of bulls and a man can easily operate the plough [Fig. 1.1 
(a)]. The indigenous wooden plough is increasingly being replaced by 
iron ploughs nowadays. Hoe : It is a simple tool which is used for 
removing weeds and for loosening the soil. It has a long rod of wood 
or iron. A strong, broad and bent plate of iron is fixed to one of 
its ends and works like a blade. It is pulled by animals [Fig. 1.1 
(b)]. Cultivator : Nowadays ploughing is done by tractor driven 
cultivator. The use of cultivator saves labour and time. [Fig. 1.1 
(c)].
