All living beings need water to live. Water is important for proper 
growth and development of flowers, fruits and seeds of plants. Water 
is absorbed by the plant roots. Along with water, minerals and 
fertilisers are also absorbed. Plants contain nearly 90% water. 
Water is essential because germination of seeds does not take place 
under dry conditions. Nutrients dissolved in water get transported 
to each part of the plant. Water also protects the crop from both 
frost and hot air currents. To maintain the moisture of the soil for 
healthy crop growth, fields have to be watered regularly. The supply 
of water to crops at different intervals is called irrigation. The 
time and frequency of irrigation varies from crop to crop, soil to 
soil and season to season. In summer, the frequency of watering is 
higher. Sources of irrigation : The sources of irrigation areâ€” 
wells, tubewells, ponds, lakes, rivers, dams and canals. The water 
available in wells, lakes and canals is lifted up by different 
methods in different regions, for taking it to the fields. Cattle or 
human labour is used in these methods. So these methods are cheaper, 
but less efficient. The various traditional ways are: moat (pulley 
-system), chain pump, dekhli and rahat. Pumps are commonly used for 
lifting water. Diesel, biogas, electricity and solar energy is used 
to run these pumps. Modern methods of irrigation help us to use 
water economically. The main methods used are as follows: (i) 
Sprinkler System: This system is more useful on the uneven land 
where sufficient water is not available. The perpendicular pipes, 
having rotating nozzles on top, are joined to the main pipeline at 
regular intervals. When water is allowed to flow through the main 
pipe under pressure with the help of a pump, it escapes from the 
rotating nozzles. It gets sprinkled on the crop as if it is raining. 
Sprinkler is very useful for sandy soil [Fig. 1.5 (a)]. Drip system 
: In this system, the water falls drop by drop just at the position 
of the roots. So it is called drip system. It is the best technique 
for watering fruit plants, gardens and trees. The system provides 
water to plants drop by drop [Fig. 1.5(b)]. Water is not wasted at 
all. It is a boon in regions where availability of water is poor.
